R interface to X-13ARIMA-SEATS
------------------------------

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/christophsax/seasonal.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/christophsax/seasonal)

*seasonal* is an easy-to-use and full-featured R-interface to X-13ARIMA-SEATS,
the newest seasonal adjustment software developed by the [United States Census
Bureau][census]. X-13ARIMA-SEATS combines and extends the capabilities of the
older X-12ARIMA (developed by the Census Bureau) and TRAMO-SEATS (developed by
the Bank of Spain).

![Graphical user interface for X-13](https://github.com/christophsax/seasonal/blob/master/vignettes/images/inspect.jpg)

If you are new to seasonal adjustment or X-13ARIMA-SEATS, the automated
procedures of *seasonal* allow you to quickly produce good seasonal adjustments
of time series. Start with the [Installation](#installation) and [Getting
started](#getting-started) section and skip the rest. Alternatively,
`demo(seas)` gives an overview of the package functionality.

If you are familiar with X-13ARIMA-SEATS, you may benefit from the flexible
input and output structure of *seasonal*. The package allows you to use (almost)
all commands of X-13ARIMA-SEATS, and it can import (almost) all output generated
by X-13ARIMA-SEATS. The only exception is the 'composite' spec, which is easy to
replicate in basic R. Read the [Input](#input) and [Output](#output) sections
and have a look at the [website of seasonal][examples], where the examples from
the official X-13ARIMA-SEATS [manual][manual] are reproduced in R.

*seasonal* includes a [graphical user interface](#inspect) that facitlitates the
use of X-13 both for beginners and advanced users. The final sections of this
vignette cover additional topics: [User defined holidays](#chinese-new- year-
indian-diwali-in-other-customized-holidays), such as Chinese New Year, the [use
of seasonal for production](#production-use), and the [import of existing X-13
model specs](#import-x-13-models-and-series) to R.


### Installation

#### Getting seasonal

The stable version is available from CRAN:

    install.packages("seasonal")

To install the latest development version directly from Github, type to the R
console:
       
    install.packages("devtools")       
    devtools::install_github('christophsax/seasonal')      

#### Getting X-13

*seasonal* does not include the binary executables of X-13ARIMA-SEATS. They can
be obtained precompiled from [here][census_win] (Windows: `x13ashtmlall.zip`).
There are guides for building it from source for [Ubuntu][ubuntu] or [Mac
OS-X][os-x].

Download the file, unzip it and copy `x13ashtml.exe` (or `x13ashtml`, on Linux
or OS-X) to any desired location on your file system.

#### Telling R where to find X-13

Next, you need to tell *seasonal* where to find the binary executables of 
X-13ARIMA-SEATS, by setting the specific environmental variable `X13_PATH`. This
may be done during your active session in R:

    Sys.setenv(X13_PATH = "YOUR_X13_DIRECTORY")
 
Exchange `YOUR_X13_DIRECTORY` with the path to your installation of 
X-13ARIMA-SEATS. Note that the Windows path `C:\something\somemore` has to be
entered UNIX-like `C:/something/somemore` or `C:\\something\\somemore`. You can
always check your installation with:

    checkX13()

If it works, you may want to set the environmental variable permanently, by
adding the `Sys.setenv` line to one of your `.Rprofile` files. The easiest is to
use the one located in your home directory, which can be written directly from
R:

    write('Sys.setenv(X13_PATH = "YOUR_X13_DIRECTORY")', 
          file = "~/.Rprofile", append = TRUE)

If the file does not exist (by default), it will be created. Make sure that you
get the quotes right: double quotes around your directory, single quotes around
the whole `Sys.setenv` line, such that R understands your string. Check first
that the the `Sys.setenv` line works correctly; once it is written you may have
to edit `.Rprofile` manually. (Or add a second, overwriting line to it.) For
other ways to set an environmental variable permanently in R, see `?Startup`.


### Getting started

seas is the core function of the *seasonal* package. By default, seas calls the
automatic procedures of X-13ARIMA-SEATS to perform a seasonal adjustment that
works well in most circumstances:

    m <- seas(AirPassengers)
     
The first argument of `seas` has to be a time series of class `"ts"`. The
function returns an object of class `"seas"` that contains all necessary
information on the adjustment.

There are several functions and methods for `"seas"` objects: The `final`
function returns the adjusted series, the `plot` method shows a plot with the
unadjusted and the adjusted series. The `summary` method allows you to display
an overview of the model:

    final(m)
    plot(m)
    summary(m)

By default, `seas` calls the SEATS adjustment procedure. If you prefer the X11
adjustment procedure, use the following option (see the [Input](#input) section
for details on how to use arbitrary options with X-13):

    seas(AirPassengers, x11 = "")

A default call to `seas` also invokes the following automatic procedures of X
-13ARIMA-SEATS:

  - Transformation selection (log / no log)
  - Detection of trading day and Easter effects
  - Outlier detection
  - ARIMA model search

Alternatively, all inputs may be entered manually, as in the following example:

    seas(x = AirPassengers, 
         regression.variables = c("td1coef", "easter[1]", "ao1951.May"), 
         arima.model = "(0 1 1)(0 1 1)", 
         regression.aictest = NULL,
         outlier = NULL, 
         transform.function = "log")

The `static` command returns the manual call of a model. The call above can be
easily generated from the automatic model:

    static(m)
    static(m, coef = TRUE)  # also fixes the coefficients
    
If you have *Shiny* installed, the `inspect` command offers an easy  way to
analyze and modify a seasonal adjustment procedure (see the section below for
details):

    inspect(m)



### Input

In *seasonal*, it is possible to use almost the complete syntax of X-13ARIMA-
SEATS. This is done via the `...` argument in the `seas` function. The X
-13ARIMA-SEATS syntax uses *specs* and *arguments*, with each spec optionally
containing some arguments. These spec-argument combinations can be added to
`seas` by separating the spec and the argument by a dot (`.`). For example, in
order to set the 'variables' argument of the 'regression' spec equal to `td` and
`ao1999.jan`, the input to `seas` looks like this:

    m <- seas(AirPassengers, regression.variables = c("td", "ao1955.jan"))
   
Note that R vectors may be used as an input. If a spec is added without any
arguments, the spec should be set equal to an empty string (or, alternatively,
to an empty list, as in previous versions). Several defaults of `seas` are empty
strings, such as the default `seats = ""`. See the help page (`?seas`) for more
details on the defaults. Note the difference between `""` (meaning the spec is
enabled but has no arguments) and `NULL` (meaning the spec is disabled).

It is possible to manipulate almost all inputs to X-13ARIMA-SEATS in this way.
The best way to learn about the relationship between the syntax of  X-13ARIMA-
SEATS and *seasonal* is to study the [comprehensive list of examples][examples].
For instance, example 1 in section 7.1 from the [manual][manual],

    series { title  =  "Quarterly Grape Harvest" start = 1950.1
           period =  4
           data  = (8997 9401 ... 11346) }
    arima { model = (0 1 1) }
    estimate { }

translates to R in the following way:

    seas(AirPassengers,
         x11 = ""),
         arima.model = "(0 1 1)"
    )
    
`seas` takes care of the 'series' spec, and no input beside the time series has 
to be provided. As `seas` uses the SEATS procedure by default, the use of X11
has to be specified manually. When the 'x11' spec is added as an input (like
above), the mutually exclusive and default 'seats' spec is automatically
disabled. With `arima.model`, an additional spec-argument is added to the input
of X-13ARIMA-SEATS. As the spec cannot be used in the same call as the 'automdl'
spec, the latter is automatically disabled.

There are some mutually exclusive specs in X-13ARIMA-SEATS. If more than one
mutually exclusive spec is included in `seas`, specs are overwritten according
the following priority rules:

- Model selection
    1. `arima`
    2. `pickmdl`
    3. `automdl` (default)

- Adjustment procedure
    1. `x11`
    2. `seats` (default)

As an alternative to the `...` argument, spec-arguments can  also be supplied as
a named list. This is useful for programming:

    seas(list = list(x = AirPassengers, x11 = ""))


### Output

*seasonal* has a flexible mechanism to read data from X-13ARIMA-SEATS. With the
`series` function, it is possible to import almost all output that can be
generated by X-13ARIMA-SEATS. For example, the following command returns the
forecasts of the ARIMA model as a `"ts"` time series:

    m <- seas(AirPassengers)
    series(m, "forecast.forecasts")
    
Because the `forecast.save = "forecasts"` argument has not been specified in the
model call, `series` re-evaluates the call with the 'forecast' spec enabled. It
is also possible to return more than one output table at the same time:

    series(m, c("forecast.forecasts", "d1"))
   
You can use either the unique short names of X-13 (such as `d1`), or the the
long names (such as `forecasts`). Because the long table names are not unique,
they need to be combined with the spec name (`forecast`). See `?series` for a
complete list of options.

Note that re-evaluation doubles the overall computation time. If you want to
speed it up, you have to be explicit about the output in the model call:

    m <- seas(AirPassengers, forecast.save = "forecasts")
    series(m, "forecast.forecasts")

Some specs, like 'slidingspans' and 'history', are time consuming. Re-evaluation
allows you to separate these specs from the basic model call:

    m <- seas(AirPassengers)
    series(m, "history.saestimates")
    series(m, "slidingspans.sfspans")
    
If you are using the HTML version of X-13, the `out` function shows the content
of the main output in the browser:

    out(m)

### Graphs

There are several graphical tools to analyze a `seas` model. The main plot
function draws the seasonally adjusted and unadjusted series, as well as the
outliers. Optionally, it also draws the trend of the seasonal decomposition:

    m <- seas(AirPassengers, regression.aictest = c("td", "easter"))
    plot(m)
    plot(m, trend = TRUE)

The `monthplot` function allows for a monthwise plot (or quarterwise, with the
same function name) of the seasonal and the SI component:

    monthplot(m)
    monthplot(m, choice = "irregular")

Also, many standard R function can be used to analyze a `"seas"` model:

    pacf(resid(m))
    spectrum(diff(resid(m)))
    plot(density(resid(m)))
    qqnorm(resid(m))
    
The `identify` method can be used to select or deselect outliers by point and
click. Click several times to loop through different outlier types.

    identify(m)


### Inspect

The `inspect` function is a graphical tool for choosing a seasonal adjustment
model, using *[Shiny][shiny]*, with the same structure as the [demo website of
seasonal][seasweb]. To install the latest version of Shiny, type:

    install.packages("shiny")

The goal of `inspect` is to summarize all relevant options, plots and statistics
that should be usually considered. `inspect` uses a `"seas"` object as its main
argument:

    inspect(m)

Frequently used options can be modified using the drop down selectors in the
upper left panel. Each change will result in a re-estimation of the seasonal
adjustment model. The R-call, the output and the summary are updated
accordingly.

Alternatively, the R-Call can be modified manually in the lower left panel.
Press 'Run Call' to re-estimate the model and to adjust the option selectors,
the output, and the summary. With the 'Close and Import' button, inspect is 
closed and the call is imported to R. The 'static' button substitutes 
automatic procedures by the automatically chosen 
spec-argument options, in the same way as `static`.

The views in the upper right panel can be selected from the drop down menu. The
views can also be customized (see `?inspect` for details)

The lower right panel shows the summary, as descibed in the help page of
`?summary.seas`. The 'Full X-13 output' button opens the complete 
output of X-13 in a separate tab or window.


### Chinese New Year, Indian Diwali and other customized holidays

seasonal includes `genhol`, a function that makes it easy to model user-defined
holiday regression effects. `genhol` is an R replacement for the equally named
software by the Census Office; no additional installation is required. The
function uses an object of class `"Date"` as its first argument,  which
specifies the occurrence of the holiday.

In order to adjust Indian industrial production for Diwali effects, use, e.g.,:

    # variables included in seasonal
    # iip: Indian industrial production
    # cny, diwali, easter: dates of Chinese New Year, Indian Diwali and Easter
    
    seas(iip, 
    x11 = "",
    xreg = genhol(diwali, start = 0, end = 0, center = "calendar"), 
    regression.usertype = "holiday"
    )

For more examples, including Chinese New Year and complex pre- and post-holiday
adjustments, see `?genhol`.


### Production use

While *seasonal* offers a quick way to adjust a time series in R, it is equally
suited for the recurring processing of potentially large numbers of time series.
There are two kind of seasonal adjustments in production use:

1. a periodic application of an adjustment model to a time series
2. an automated adjustment to a large number of time series

This section shows how both tasks can be accomplished with *seasonal* and basic R.


#### Storing calls and batch processing

`seas` calls are R objects of the standard class `"call"`. Like any R object,
calls can be stored in a list. In order to extract the call of a `"seas"`
object, you can access the `$call` element or extract the static call with
`static()`. For example,

    # two different models for two different time series
    m1 <- seas(fdeaths, x11 = "")
    m2 <- seas(mdeaths, x11 = "")

    l <- list()
    l$c1 <- static(m1)  # static call (with automated procedures substituted)
    l$c2 <- m2$call     # original call


The list can be stored and re-evaluated if new data becomes available:

    ll <- lapply(l, eval)


which returns another list containing the re-evaluated `"seas"` objects. If you 
want to extract the final series, use:

    do.call(cbind, lapply(ll, final))


Of course, you also can extract any other series, e.g.:

    # seasonal component of an X11 adjustment, see ?series
    do.call(cbind, lapply(ll, series, "d10"))


#### Automated adjustment of multiple series

X-13 can also be applied to a large number of series, using automated adjustment
methods. This can be accomplished with a loop or an apply function. It is useful
to wrap the call to `seas` in a `try` statement; that way, an error will not
break the execution. You need to develop an error handling strategy for these
cases: You can either drop them, use them without adjustment or switch to a
different automated routine.

    # collect data 
    dta <- list(fdeaths = fdeaths, mdeaths = mdeaths)

    # loop over dta
    ll <- lapply(dta, function(e) try(seas(e, x11 = "")))

    # list failing models
    is.err <- sapply(ll, class) == "try-error"
    ll[is.err]

    # return final series of successful evaluations
    do.call(cbind, lapply(ll[!is.err], final))


If you have several cores and want to speed things up, the process is well
suited for parallelization:

    # a list with 100 time series
    largedta <- rep(list(AirPassengers), 100)

    library(parallel)  # this is part of a standard R installation

 If you are on Windows or want to use cluster parallelization, use `parLapply`:

    # set up cluster
    cl <- makeCluster(detectCores())

    # load 'seasonal' for each node
    clusterEvalQ(cl, library(seasonal))

    # export data to each node
    clusterExport(cl, varlist = "largedta")

    # run in parallel (2.2s on a 8-core Macbook, vs 9.6s with standard lapply)
    parLapply(cl, largedta, function(e) try(seas(e, x11 = "")))

    # finally, stop the cluster
    stopCluster(cl)

On Linux or OS-X, 'forking' parallelization allows you to do the same in a
single line:

    mclapply(cl, largedta, function(e) try(seas(e, x11 = "")))


### Import X-13 models and series

Two experimental utility functions allow you to import `.spc` files and X-13
data files from any X-13 set-up. Simply locate the path of your X-13 `.spc`
file, and the `import.spc` function will construct the corresponding call to
`seas` as well as the calls for importing the data.

    # importing the orginal X-13 example file
    import.spc(system.file("tests", "Testairline.spc", package="seasonal"))

If data is stored outside the `.spc` file (as it usually will be), the
calls will make use of the `import.ts` function, which imports arbitrary X-13
data files as R time series. See `?import.ts` for examples.


### License and Credits

*seasonal* is free and open source, licensed under GPL-3. It requires the X
-13ARIMA-SEATS software by the U.S. Census Bureau, which is open source and
freely available under the terms of its own [license][license].

*seasonal* has been originally developed for the use at the Swiss State
Secretariat of Economic Affairs. It has been greatly improved over time thanks
to suggestions and support from Matthias Bannert, Freya Beamish, Vidur Dhanda,
Alain Galli, Ronald Indergand, Preetha Kalambaden, Stefan Leist, James Livsey,
Brian Monsell, Pinaki Mukherjee, Bruno Parnisari, and many others.

Please report bugs and suggestions on [Github][github] or send me an 
[e-mail](mailto:christoph.sax@gmail.com). Thank you!


[manual]: http://www.census.gov/ts/x13as/docX13ASHTML.pdf "Reference Manual"

[census]: http://www.census.gov/srd/www/x13as/ "United States Census Bureau"

[license]: https://www.census.gov/srd/www/disclaimer.html "License Information and Disclaimer"

[census_win]: http://www.census.gov/srd/www/x13as/x13down_pc.html "Combined X-13ARIMA-SEATS archives"

[census_linux]: http://www.census.gov/srd/www/x13as/x13down_unix.html "Combined X-13ARIMA-SEATS archives"

[examples]: http://www.seasonal.website/examples.html "Examples of X-13ARIMA-SEATS in R"

[seasweb]: http://www.seasonal.website "Examples of X-13ARIMA-SEATS in R"

[github]: https://github.com/christophsax/seasonal "Development on Github"

[shiny]: http://shiny.rstudio.com

[ubuntu]: https://github.com/christophsax/seasonal/wiki/Compiling-X-13ARIMA-SEATS-from-Source-for-Ubuntu "Linux Installation Notes"

[os-x]: https://github.com/christophsax/seasonal/wiki/Compiling-X-13ARIMA-SEATS-from-Source-for-OS-X "OS-X Installation Notes"
